README.md, before:

# Ctructure README

Ctructure is an opinionated, [prettier](https://github.com/prettier/prettier)-inspired code formatter for the C programming language. Currently a work in progress.

- [Commands](#commands)
  - [formatCurrentDocument](#formatcurrentdocument)
  - [formatWorkspaceFolder](#formatworkspacefolder)
  - [formatAllWorkspaceFolders](#formatallworkspacefolders)
  - [createConfigFile](#createconfigfile)
  - [createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder](#createconfigfileineveryworkspacefolder)
- [Directives](#directives)
  - [no-format](#no-format)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs](#formatallworkspacefoldersshowlogs)
  - [formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs](#formatworkspacefoldershowlogs)
  - [printer.indentationSize](#printerindentationsize)
  - [printer.indentationType](#printerindentationtype)
  - [printer.lineEndings](#printerlineendings)
  - [printer.lineWidth](#printerlinewidth)
  - [printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline](#printermultivariablealwaysnewline)
  - [printer.multiVariableMatchIndent](#printermultivariablematchindent)
- [Limitations](#limitations)
- [Issues](#issues)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Inner Workings](#inner-workings)
  - [Lexing](#lexing)
  - [Printing](#printing)
  - [File-writing](#file-writing)

# Commands

## formatCurrentDocument
Formats the currently active document. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatCurrentDocument`.

## formatWorkspaceFolder
Formats all matching files in a workspace folder. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatWorkspaceFolder`.

## formatAllWorkspaceFolders
Formats all matching files in all workspace folders. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatAllWorkspaceFolders`.

## createConfigFile
Creates a configuration file (`ctructureconf.json`) in the root of a workspace folder. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.createConfigFile`.

## createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder
Creates a configuration file (`ctructureconf.json`) in every workspace folder. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder`.

## convertWorkspaceFolderLineEndings
Converts line endings for all files in a workspace. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.convertWorkspaceFolderLineEndings`.

# Directives
Directives modify formatting behavior. They are declared inside comments, beginning with `@ct-`, and are case insensitive.

## no-format
The `@ct-no-format` directive marks a line or section of code to be ignored.
Single-line comment directives (e.g. `// @ct-no-format`) ignore the following line,
2 multi-line comment directives (e.g. `/* @ct-no-format */`) create a section of code to be ignored.

```cpp
int func_with_ignored_code() {
  // @ct-no-format, ignore next line only
  int a=1, b=2;

  /* @ct-no-format, ignore multiple lines */
  a = (a + b) |
      (a - b) &
      (a * b) ^
      (a / b);
  /* @ct-no-format, end ignored section */

  return a;
}
```

# Configuration

A configuration file can be used to control extension behavior. They must exist in the root of a workspace folder (`workspaceFolder/ctructureconf.json`) and only apply to that single folder. If a workspace has multiple folders, each folder can/should have its own configuration file. If no configuration file exists for a workspace folder, the default configuration (shown below) is used. The [Ctructure.createConfigFile](#createconfigfile) and [Ctructure.createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder](#createconfigfileineveryworkspacefolder) commands can be used to generate configuration files.

```ts
interface IConfig {
  'formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs': boolean;
  'formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs': boolean;
  'printer.indentationSize': 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10;
  'printer.indentationType': 'tabs' | 'spaces';
  'printer.lineEndings': 'lf' | 'crlf';
  'printer.lineWidth': number; // must be >0
  'printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline': boolean;
  'printer.multiVariableMatchIndent': boolean;
}
```

```ts
const defaultConfig: IConfig = {
  'formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs': true,
  'formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs': true,
  'printer.indentationSize': 2,
  'printer.indentationType': 'spaces',
  'printer.lineEndings': 'lf',
  'printer.lineWidth': 80,
  'printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline': false,
  'printer.multiVariableMatchIndent': false,
};
```

## formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs
Controls whether a log file will be generated and shown in the editor after running [Ctructure.formatAllWorkspaceFolders](#formatallworkspacefolders).

## formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs
Controls whether a log file will be generated and shown in the editor after running [Ctructure.formatWorkspaceFolder](#formatworkspacefolder).

## printer.indentationSize
Controls the amount of spaces inserted per indentation level when [printer.indentationType](#printerindentationtype) is set to `spaces`. Has no effect if [printer.indentationType]() is set to `tabs`.

## printer.indentationType
Controls the type of character used for indentation used by the printer. `tabs` will insert 1 tab (`\t`) per indentation level, `spaces` will insert [printer.indentationSize](#printerindentationsize) real spaces per indentation level.

## printer.lineEndings
Controls the end-of-line character sequence used by the printer. `lf` will insert a linefeed (`\n`), `crlf` will insert a carriage-return + linefeed (`\r\n`).

## printer.lineWidth
Controls the maximum ideal number of columns per line. This does not guarantee that all line lengths will fall within this maximum. This setting currently has a margin of error of approx. ±5 characters, so a value of 80 may result in some lines having a width of up to 85 characters (or more if it is not possible to break the line, such as when there are long [string literals](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/c-language/c-string-literals?view=msvc-170) present).

## printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline
Controls whether variables in a multi-variable declaration/definition will be put on separate lines.

```cpp
// printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline OFF (false)
int var1 = 1, var2 = 2, var3;

// printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline ON (true)
int var1 = 1,
  var2 = 2,
  var3;
```

## printer.multiVariableMatchIndent
Controls whether indentation is matched for all line-separated variables in a multi-variable declaration/definition.

```cpp
// printer.multiVariableMatchIndent OFF (false)
int var1 = 1,
  var2 = 2,
  var3;

// printer.multiVariableMatchIndent ON (true)
int var1 = 1,
    var2 = 2,
    var3;

/* has no effect on one-liners
  (i.e. when printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline is false) */
int x = 1, y = 2, z;
```

# Limitations
- Max supported input file size is 512 MB

# Issues
If you encounter unexpected behavior/failures or just have a suggestion, please create an [issue](https://github.com/nluka/Ctructure/issues). If the issue is a bug, include a copy of the exact file you were trying to format + the error or description of unexpected behavior.

# Contributing
All contributions are welcome.

# Inner Workings
The formatting process consists of 3 major steps.
1. [Lexing](#lexing)
2. [Printing](#printing)
3. [File-writing](#file-writing)

## Lexing
Lexing is the process of parsing the input file and extracting all of its tokens into a data structure, which is then handed off to the printer. In the first stage the input file is scanned sequentially once and tokens are extracted, in the second stage any ambiguous tokens are disambiguated.

The steps for extracting a token:
1. Find the position of the token's first character (`Tokenizer.moveCursorToBeginningOfNextToken`)
2. Based on the token's first character, determine the category of the token (`tokenDetermineCategory`)
3. Based on the position of the token's first character and its category, determine the position of the last character (`tokenFindEndPosition`)
4. Based on the positions of the token's first and last character and its category, determine the specific type (`TokenType`) of the token (`tokenDetermineType`) (token types which cannot be concretely determined on this first pass are given an ambiguous type)

Tokens are disambiguated (`tokenDisambiguate`) by looking at the tokens behind and or ahead. Lookaround complexity varies depending on the token.

## Printing
Printing is the process of using the tokens generated by the lexer to create a formatted string.

The printer formats each token based on:
1. **Type** - the printer uses a map (`tokenTypeToValueMap`) for keywords, preprocessors, operators, and special types to get a token's value. When the file must be read to gather its value, the positions of the token's first and last character (`tokenFindEndPosition`) is used to slice its value from the input file.
2. **Context** - set as the printer goes through each token. Context can be set to a `PrinterCategory` or `TokenType`. Each type may have a large or small impact on context, and its formatting may or may not be influenced by context. When there are parentheses, braces, or brackets, context is stored in a `Stack` so that it can be retrieved later.
3. **Overflow** - determined in `checkForLineOverflow`. This is mostly checked for with parentheses, brackets, and arrays. If a line exceeds the set character limit, the line will be broken up at appropriate points.

## File-writing
Once the printer has created a formatted string, it is used to write over the input file, completing the formatting process.

Commit message:

README: add unsupported syntax section

README.md, after:

# Ctructure README

Ctructure is an opinionated, [prettier](https://github.com/prettier/prettier)-inspired code formatter for the C programming language. Currently a work in progress.

- [Commands](#commands)
  - [formatCurrentDocument](#formatcurrentdocument)
  - [formatWorkspaceFolder](#formatworkspacefolder)
  - [formatAllWorkspaceFolders](#formatallworkspacefolders)
  - [createConfigFile](#createconfigfile)
  - [createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder](#createconfigfileineveryworkspacefolder)
- [Directives](#directives)
  - [no-format](#no-format)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs](#formatallworkspacefoldersshowlogs)
  - [formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs](#formatworkspacefoldershowlogs)
  - [printer.indentationSize](#printerindentationsize)
  - [printer.indentationType](#printerindentationtype)
  - [printer.lineEndings](#printerlineendings)
  - [printer.lineWidth](#printerlinewidth)
  - [printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline](#printermultivariablealwaysnewline)
  - [printer.multiVariableMatchIndent](#printermultivariablematchindent)
- [Unsupported Syntax](#unsupported-syntax)
  - [Unsupported Syntax](#unsupported-syntax)
- [Limitations](#limitations)
- [Issues](#issues)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Inner Workings](#inner-workings)
  - [Lexing](#lexing)
  - [Printing](#printing)
  - [File-writing](#file-writing)

# Commands

## formatCurrentDocument
Formats the currently active document. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatCurrentDocument`.

## formatWorkspaceFolder
Formats all matching files in a workspace folder. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatWorkspaceFolder`.

## formatAllWorkspaceFolders
Formats all matching files in all workspace folders. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.formatAllWorkspaceFolders`.

## createConfigFile
Creates a configuration file (`ctructureconf.json`) in the root of a workspace folder. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.createConfigFile`.

## createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder
Creates a configuration file (`ctructureconf.json`) in every workspace folder. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder`.

## convertWorkspaceFolderLineEndings
Converts line endings for all files in a workspace. If there are multiple workspace folders, a selection must be made. To use, [open the command palette](https://www.alphr.com/open-command-vs-code/) and run `Ctructure.convertWorkspaceFolderLineEndings`.

# Directives
Directives modify formatting behavior. They are declared inside comments, beginning with `@ct-`, and are case insensitive.

## no-format
The `@ct-no-format` directive marks a line or section of code to be ignored.
Single-line comment directives (e.g. `// @ct-no-format`) ignore the following line,
2 multi-line comment directives (e.g. `/* @ct-no-format */`) create a section of code to be ignored.

```c
int func_with_ignored_code() {
  // @ct-no-format, ignore next line only
  int a=1, b=2;

  /* @ct-no-format, ignore multiple lines */
  a = (a + b) |
      (a - b) &
      (a * b) ^
      (a / b);
  /* @ct-no-format, end ignored section */

  return a;
}
```

# Configuration

A configuration file can be used to control extension behavior. They must exist in the root of a workspace folder (`workspaceFolder/ctructureconf.json`) and only apply to that single folder. If a workspace has multiple folders, each folder can/should have its own configuration file. If no configuration file exists for a workspace folder, the default configuration (shown below) is used. The [Ctructure.createConfigFile](#createconfigfile) and [Ctructure.createConfigFileInEveryWorkspaceFolder](#createconfigfileineveryworkspacefolder) commands can be used to generate configuration files.

```ts
interface IConfig {
  'formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs': boolean;
  'formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs': boolean;
  'printer.indentationSize': 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10;
  'printer.indentationType': 'tabs' | 'spaces';
  'printer.lineEndings': 'lf' | 'crlf';
  'printer.lineWidth': number; // must be >0
  'printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline': boolean;
  'printer.multiVariableMatchIndent': boolean;
}
```

```ts
const defaultConfig: IConfig = {
  'formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs': true,
  'formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs': true,
  'printer.indentationSize': 2,
  'printer.indentationType': 'spaces',
  'printer.lineEndings': 'lf',
  'printer.lineWidth': 80,
  'printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline': false,
  'printer.multiVariableMatchIndent': false,
};
```

## formatAllWorkspaceFolders.showLogs
Controls whether a log file will be generated and shown in the editor after running [Ctructure.formatAllWorkspaceFolders](#formatallworkspacefolders).

## formatWorkspaceFolder.showLogs
Controls whether a log file will be generated and shown in the editor after running [Ctructure.formatWorkspaceFolder](#formatworkspacefolder).

## printer.indentationSize
Controls the amount of spaces inserted per indentation level when [printer.indentationType](#printerindentationtype) is set to `spaces`. Has no effect if [printer.indentationType]() is set to `tabs`.

## printer.indentationType
Controls the type of character used for indentation used by the printer. `tabs` will insert 1 tab (`\t`) per indentation level, `spaces` will insert [printer.indentationSize](#printerindentationsize) real spaces per indentation level.

## printer.lineEndings
Controls the end-of-line character sequence used by the printer: `lf` will insert a linefeed (`\n`), `crlf` will insert a carriage-return + linefeed (`\r\n`).

## printer.lineWidth
Controls the maximum ideal number of columns per line. This does not guarantee that all line lengths will fall within this maximum. This setting currently has a margin of error of approx. ±5 characters, so a value of 80 may result in some lines having a width of up to 85 characters (or more if it is not possible to break the line, such as when there are long [string literals](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/c-language/c-string-literals?view=msvc-170) present).

## printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline
Controls whether variables in a multi-variable declaration/definition will be put on separate lines.

```c
// printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline OFF (false)
int var1 = 1, var2 = 2, var3;

// printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline ON (true)
int var1 = 1,
  var2 = 2,
  var3;
```

## printer.multiVariableMatchIndent
Controls whether indentation is matched for all line-separated variables in a multi-variable declaration/definition.

```c
// printer.multiVariableMatchIndent OFF (false)
int var1 = 1,
  var2 = 2,
  var3;

// printer.multiVariableMatchIndent ON (true)
int var1 = 1,
    var2 = 2,
    var3;

// has no effect on one-liners
// (i.e. when printer.multiVariableAlwaysNewline is false)
int x = 1, y = 2, z;
```

# Unsupported Syntax

## Multiline comment start in preprocessor macro

```c
// NOT SUPPORTED:
#define MACRO_NAME MACRO_VALUE /* <- multiline comment start
more comment content
comment end -> */

// THIS IS OK:
#define MACRO_NAME MACRO_VALUE // singleline comment
```

# Limitations
- Max supported input file size is 512 MB

# Issues
If you encounter unexpected behavior/failures or just have a suggestion, please create an [issue](https://github.com/nluka/Ctructure/issues). If the issue is a bug, include a copy of the exact file you were trying to format + the error or description of unexpected behavior.

# Contributing
All contributions are welcome.

# Inner Workings
The formatting process consists of 3 major steps.
1. [Lexing](#lexing)
2. [Printing](#printing)
3. [File-writing](#file-writing)

## Lexing
Lexing is the process of parsing the input file and extracting all of its tokens into a data structure, which is then handed off to the printer. In the first stage the input file is scanned sequentially once and tokens are extracted, in the second stage any ambiguous tokens are disambiguated.

The steps for extracting a token:
1. Find the position of the token's first character (`Tokenizer.moveCursorToBeginningOfNextToken`)
2. Based on the token's first character, determine the category of the token (`tokenDetermineCategory`)
3. Based on the position of the token's first character and its category, determine the position of the last character (`tokenFindEndPosition`)
4. Based on the positions of the token's first and last character and its category, determine the specific type (`TokenType`) of the token (`tokenDetermineType`) (token types which cannot be concretely determined on this first pass are given an ambiguous type)

Tokens are disambiguated (`tokenDisambiguate`) by looking at the tokens behind and or ahead. Lookaround complexity varies depending on the token.

## Printing
Printing is the process of using the tokens generated by the lexer to create a formatted string.

The printer formats each token based on:
1. **Type** - the printer uses a map (`tokenTypeToValueMap`) for keywords, preprocessors, operators, and special types to get a token's value. When the file must be read to gather its value, the positions of the token's first and last character (`tokenFindEndPosition`) is used to slice its value from the input file.
2. **Context** - set as the printer goes through each token. Context can be set to a `PrinterCategory` or `TokenType`. Each type may have a large or small impact on context, and its formatting may or may not be influenced by context. When there are parentheses, braces, or brackets, context is stored in a `Stack` so that it can be retrieved later.
3. **Overflow** - determined in `checkForLineOverflow`. This is mostly checked for with parentheses, brackets, and arrays. If a line exceeds the set character limit, the line will be broken up at appropriate points.

## File-writing
Once the printer has created a formatted string, it is used to write over the input file, completing the formatting process.
